README.md, before:

# IRIX NVMe Driver

An NVMe driver for SGI IRIX 6.5, providing SCSI emulation to allow legacy IRIX disk drivers to work with modern NVMe SSDs.

## Building
Install all the dev env and mipspro 7.4.4.
Set CPUBOARD in Makefile to IP30 or IP32
make
make load
make ioc
hinv -v
fx
enjoy

## Tested with
- PLX and PERICOM PCI-PCIe bridges, (Sedna and Startech on Amazon), the PLX bridges are cheaper on eBay
- your favorite no name brand passive PCIe-M.2 adapter
- cheapo Liteon and Patriot NVME ssds. Samsung 990 EVO didnt show up on the bus though.
- R12K/300 O2 and Dual R14k/600 Octane with shoebox.

## Project Structure

```
irixnvme/
├── nvme.h          - NVMe specification definitions (registers, commands, structures)
├── nvmedrv.h       - Driver-specific structures and function prototypes
├── nvmedrv.c       - Main driver (PCI, initialization, SCSI registration)
├── nvme_scsi.c     - SCSI to NVMe translation layer
├── nvme_cmd.c      - NVMe command construction and submission
├── nvme_cpl.c      - NVMe completion queue handling
├── Makefile        - IRIX smake build file
└── README.md       - This file
```

## Architecture

### Component Responsibilities

**nvme.h**
- Pure NVMe spec definitions from NVMe 1.0e
- Register offsets, bit definitions
- Command/completion structures
- Status codes
- Portable across different OS implementations

**nvmedrv.h**
- IRIX-specific driver structures
- `nvme_soft_t` - Controller state and namespace information
- `nvme_queue_t` - Queue pair management
- Function prototypes for all modules

**nvmedrv.c**
- PCI driver registration (wildcard matching on class code 0x010802)
- Controller initialization and shutdown
- SCSI controller registration
- Hardware graph integration
- Interrupt handling

**nvme_scsi.c**
- SCSI CDB to NVMe command translation
- Implements standard SCSI commands:
  - INQUIRY
  - READ CAPACITY
  - TEST UNIT READY
  - READ (6/10/16)
  - WRITE (6/10/16)
  - MODE SENSE
  - SYNC CACHE
- Provides SCSI interface functions for dksc driver

**nvme_cmd.c**
- NVMe command construction
- Admin commands (Identify, Create/Delete Queues)
- I/O commands (Read, Write)
- Command submission to queues
- Doorbell ringing

**nvme_cpl.c**
- Completion queue processing
- Phase bit tracking
- Completion handler dispatch
- Doorbell updates

## How It Works

### PCI Discovery
1. Driver registers with wildcard vendor/device IDs (-1, -1)
2. Attach function checks PCI class code for NVMe (0x010802)
3. Maps BAR0 (controller registers)
4. Reads controller capabilities

### SCSI Emulation
1. Creates SCSI controller in hardware graph: `/hw/scsi_ctlr/N`
2. NVMe namespace 1 appears as SCSI target 0
3. IRIX `dksc` driver attaches to SCSI devices
4. SCSI commands are translated to NVMe commands

### Device Paths

```
May be somewhat different on Octane
/hw/node/io/pci/9
├── scsi_ctlr/(probably)2/    <- NVMe driver creates this
    └── target/0/             <- Namespace 1
        └── lun/0/
            └── disk/         <- dksc attaches here
                └── dks2d1s0  <- Usable block device

```

### SCSI to NVMe Translation Examples

| SCSI Command | NVMe Translation |
|--------------|------------------|
| INQUIRY | Synthesize from Identify Controller |
| READ CAPACITY(10) | Get from Identify Namespace (NSZE field) |
| READ(10) | NVMe Read command with LBA/count from CDB |
| WRITE(10) | NVMe Write command with LBA/count from CDB |
| TEST UNIT READY | Check controller ready bit (CSTS.RDY) |

## Building

On an IRIX system with kernel build tools:

```from your shell
make           # Compile all modules
make load      # Load driver into kernel
make unload    # Unload driver (doesnt quite work, make reboot does)
make clean     # Remove build artifacts
make nt        # build test program

```

## Testing

The `nvmetest.c` program provides comprehensive testing of the driver via the SCSI layer:

```bash
# Compile test program on IRIX
cc -o nvmetest nvmetest.c

# Basic tests
./nvmetest -a                    # Run all basic tests (INQUIRY, READ CAPACITY, single read)

# Single operations
./nvmetest -i                    # INQUIRY test
./nvmetest -c                    # READ CAPACITY test
./nvmetest -r 0                  # Read single block at LBA 0
./nvmetest -w 100                # Write/read verification at LBA 100

# Sequential reads (tests PRP chaining)
./nvmetest -s 0 8192            # Read 8192 blocks (4MB) starting at LBA 0

# Random write/read stress test (DESTRUCTIVE!)
./nvmetest -R 100               # 100 iterations of random write/read tests
./nvmetest -R 1000              # 1000 iterations for extended testing
```

### Random Write/Read Test Features

The `-R` option runs a comprehensive stress test that:

- **Random LBA selection**: Writes to random locations within first 10,000 blocks
- **Random transfer sizes**: 1 block to 1024 blocks (512KB) per operation
- **Random buffer alignments**: Tests 4KB page-aligned, 512B block-aligned, and random 4-byte alignments
- **Data verification**: Each write is followed by 2-5 overlapping reads with checksum verification
- **Pattern generation**: Uses reproducible random data patterns for verification

This test is **DESTRUCTIVE** and will overwrite data on the drive. Only use on test systems with no important data.

Example output:
```
=== Random Write/Read Stress Test ===
Max LBA range: 0-10000
Iterations: 100

--- Iteration 1/100 ---
WRITE: LBA 4523, blocks 128 (65536 bytes), align 4096 bytes
  Write OK (checksum=0x12345678)
  READ 1/3: LBA 4523, blocks 64 (32768 bytes), align 512 bytes
    VERIFY OK: overlap LBA 4523-4586 (checksum=0x0abcdef0)
  READ 2/3: LBA 4600, blocks 50 (25600 bytes), align 4096 bytes
    VERIFY OK: overlap LBA 4600-4650 (checksum=0x0fedcba0)
...
```

## Hardware Requirements

- SGI system running IRIX 6.5
- PCI to PCIe bridge
- NVMe SSD
- Tested platforms: IP32 (O2), others should work

## Inspiration

This driver is equally stupid as the Windows 2000 NVMe driver (`nvme2k`), attempting to bring modern NVMe storage to a legacy OS that predates the NVMe specification by over a decade.

## References

- NVMe 1.0e Specification
- IRIX Device Driver Programmer's Guide (useless)
- simple_irix_driver (basic loadable module example)

## License

Educational/research purposes. See source files for details.

## Author

Bringing NVMe to IRIX, one ridiculous project at a time.

Commit message:

fixed initialization on irix 6.5.30 added support for IP35 (Fuel) added some resilience in many places added timeouts and retries. try doing single block transactions on retry. hopefully this will help dma issues? added watchdog for missed interrupts.

README.md, after:

# IRIX NVMe Driver

An NVMe driver for SGI IRIX 6.5, providing SCSI emulation to allow legacy IRIX disk drivers to work with modern NVMe SSDs.

## Building
Install all the dev env and mipspro 7.4.4.
Set CPUBOARD in Makefile to IP30, IP32 or IP35
make
make load
make ioc
hinv -v
fx
enjoy

## Tested with
- PLX and PERICOM PCI-PCIe bridges, (Sedna and Startech on Amazon), the PLX bridges are cheaper on eBay
- your favorite no name brand passive PCIe-M.2 adapter
- cheapo Liteon and Patriot NVME ssds. Samsung 990 EVO didnt show up on the bus though.
- R12K/300 O2 and Dual R14k/600 Octane with shoebox.

## Project Structure

```
irixnvme/
├── nvme.h          - NVMe specification definitions (registers, commands, structures)
├── nvmedrv.h       - Driver-specific structures and function prototypes
├── nvmedrv.c       - Main driver (PCI, initialization, SCSI registration)
├── nvme_scsi.c     - SCSI to NVMe translation layer
├── nvme_cmd.c      - NVMe command construction and submission
├── nvme_cpl.c      - NVMe completion queue handling
├── Makefile        - IRIX make build file
└── README.md       - This file
```

## Architecture

### Component Responsibilities

**nvme.h**
- Pure NVMe spec definitions from NVMe 1.0e
- Register offsets, bit definitions
- Command/completion structures
- Status codes
- Portable across different OS implementations

**nvmedrv.h**
- IRIX-specific driver structures
- `nvme_soft_t` - Controller state and namespace information
- `nvme_queue_t` - Queue pair management
- Function prototypes for all modules

**nvmedrv.c**
- PCI driver registration (wildcard matching on class code 0x010802)
- Controller initialization and shutdown
- SCSI controller registration
- Hardware graph integration
- Interrupt handling

**nvme_scsi.c**
- SCSI CDB to NVMe command translation
- Implements standard SCSI commands:
  - INQUIRY
  - READ CAPACITY
  - TEST UNIT READY
  - READ (6/10/16)
  - WRITE (6/10/16)
  - MODE SENSE
  - SYNC CACHE
- Provides SCSI interface functions for dksc driver

**nvme_cmd.c**
- NVMe command construction
- Admin commands (Identify, Create/Delete Queues)
- I/O commands (Read, Write)
- Command submission to queues
- Doorbell ringing

**nvme_cpl.c**
- Completion queue processing
- Phase bit tracking
- Completion handler dispatch
- Doorbell updates

## How It Works

### PCI Discovery
1. Driver registers with wildcard vendor/device IDs (-1, -1)
2. Attach function checks PCI class code for NVMe (0x010802)
3. Maps BAR0 (controller registers)
4. Reads controller capabilities

### SCSI Emulation
1. Creates SCSI controller in hardware graph: `/hw/scsi_ctlr/N`
2. NVMe namespace 1 appears as SCSI target 0
3. IRIX `dksc` driver attaches to SCSI devices
4. SCSI commands are translated to NVMe commands

### Device Paths

```
May be somewhat different on Octane
/hw/node/io/pci/9
├── scsi_ctlr/(probably)2/    <- NVMe driver creates this
    └── target/0/             <- Namespace 1
        └── lun/0/
            └── disk/         <- dksc attaches here
                └── dks2d1s0  <- Usable block device

```

### SCSI to NVMe Translation Examples

| SCSI Command | NVMe Translation |
|--------------|------------------|
| INQUIRY | Synthesize from Identify Controller |
| READ CAPACITY(10) | Get from Identify Namespace (NSZE field) |
| READ(10) | NVMe Read command with LBA/count from CDB |
| WRITE(10) | NVMe Write command with LBA/count from CDB |
| TEST UNIT READY | Check controller ready bit (CSTS.RDY) |

## Building

On an IRIX system with kernel build tools:

```from your shell
make           # Compile all modules
make load      # Load driver into kernel
make unload    # Unload driver (doesnt quite work, make reboot does)
make clean     # Remove build artifacts
make nt        # build test program

```

## Testing

The `nvmetest.c` program provides comprehensive testing of the driver via the SCSI layer:

```bash
# Compile test program on IRIX
cc -o nvmetest nvmetest.c

# Basic tests
./nvmetest -a                    # Run all basic tests (INQUIRY, READ CAPACITY, single read)

# Single operations
./nvmetest -i                    # INQUIRY test
./nvmetest -c                    # READ CAPACITY test
./nvmetest -r 0                  # Read single block at LBA 0
./nvmetest -w 100                # Write/read verification at LBA 100

# Sequential reads (tests PRP chaining)
./nvmetest -s 0 8192            # Read 8192 blocks (4MB) starting at LBA 0

# Random write/read stress test (DESTRUCTIVE!)
./nvmetest -R 100               # 100 iterations of random write/read tests
./nvmetest -R 1000              # 1000 iterations for extended testing
```

### Random Write/Read Test Features

The `-R` option runs a comprehensive stress test that:

- **Random LBA selection**: Writes to random locations within first 10,000 blocks
- **Random transfer sizes**: 1 block to 1024 blocks (512KB) per operation
- **Random buffer alignments**: Tests 4KB page-aligned, 512B block-aligned, and random 4-byte alignments
- **Data verification**: Each write is followed by 2-5 overlapping reads with checksum verification
- **Pattern generation**: Uses reproducible random data patterns for verification

This test is **DESTRUCTIVE** and will overwrite data on the drive. Only use on test systems with no important data.

Example output:
```
=== Random Write/Read Stress Test ===
Max LBA range: 0-10000
Iterations: 100

--- Iteration 1/100 ---
WRITE: LBA 4523, blocks 128 (65536 bytes), align 4096 bytes
  Write OK (checksum=0x12345678)
  READ 1/3: LBA 4523, blocks 64 (32768 bytes), align 512 bytes
    VERIFY OK: overlap LBA 4523-4586 (checksum=0x0abcdef0)
  READ 2/3: LBA 4600, blocks 50 (25600 bytes), align 4096 bytes
    VERIFY OK: overlap LBA 4600-4650 (checksum=0x0fedcba0)
...
```

## Hardware Requirements

- SGI system running IRIX 6.5
- PCI to PCIe bridge
- NVMe SSD
- Tested platforms: IP32 (O2), IP30 (Octane), IP35 (Fuel), others could work

## Inspiration

This driver is equally stupid as the Windows 2000 NVMe driver (`nvme2k`), attempting to bring modern NVMe storage to a legacy OS that predates the NVMe specification by over a decade.

## References

- NVMe 1.0e Specification
- IRIX Device Driver Programmer's Guide (useless)
- simple_irix_driver (basic loadable module example)

## License

BSD 3 clause.
Use at your risk, don't cry to me if it kills your cat or something.

## Author

Bringing NVMe to IRIX, one ridiculous project at a time.
